Guiding Philosophy of EALS
Our cause—to end apostophobia and apostasy laws—will outlive us all. To secure its future, we must help others replace us, become as good as us, and ultimately surpass us, creating greater impact than we do today.

As Isaac Newton said, “If I have seen a little further, it is by standing on the shoulders of giants,” and Eli Goldratt added (paraphrased): “It’s our responsibility to stand on their shoulders and see further than they did.”

The guiding mindset for any of us should be: to become the greatest leader, one must first become the greatest follower.

Our Vision
We envision a world that recognizes love as the goal and reason as the method to achieve it.

Love means wanting the best for people, even our enemies. So instead of thinking “I want my enemies to suffer,” we think “I want my enemies to turn to the good side so we can become friends.”

For our friends and loved ones, love means sometimes having to say to them, “If helping you means hurting me, then I’m not interested.” The idea is that all human interaction can—and should—be win-win: nobody loses, everybody gets what they want, and nobody is sacrificed to another.

Reason means recognizes that we are fallible beings—we can be wrong even when we think we’re right. Even when we think we’re acting out of love, we could be wrong—we might have crossed over into abuse without realizing it. So we must seek out critical feedback on our actions and leave open paths to discover our mistakes. We must be able to answer: If I’m wrong and someone knows it, how will I find out? Do I make it easy for others to correct me? Or do I build massive walls that effectively block people from educating me?

Reason allows us to master our emotions, not suppress them. As Aristotle said, “Anybody can become angry—that is easy; but to be angry with the right person, to the right degree, at the right time, for the right purpose, and in the right way—that is not within everybody’s po​​wer and is not easy." But note: everybody can grow both the strength and skill of their anger, learning to wield it with precision so it serves only good and never evil.

By practicing love and reason, we become capable of growth, skillful action, and effective leadership.

Level up. Grow. Lead by learning.


[ignore this. its the default system text from Discourse platform]

This is a Civilized Place for Public Discussion

Please treat this discussion forum with the same respect you would a public park. We, too, are a shared community resource — a place to share skills, knowledge and interests through ongoing conversation.

These are not hard and fast rules. They are guidelines to aid the human judgment of our community and keep this a kind, friendly place for civilized public discourse.



Improve the Discussion

Help us make this a great place for discussion by always adding something positive to the discussion, however small. If you are not sure your post adds to the conversation, think over what you want to say and try again later.

One way to improve the discussion is by discovering ones that are already happening. Spend time browsing the topics here before replying or starting your own, and you’ll have a better chance of meeting others who share your interests.

The topics discussed here matter to us, and we want you to act as if they matter to you, too. Be respectful of the topics and the people discussing them, even if you disagree with some of what is being said.



Be Agreeable, Even When You Disagree

You may wish to respond by disagreeing. That’s fine. But remember to criticize ideas, not people. Please avoid:

Name-calling

Ad hominem attacks

Responding to a post’s tone instead of its actual content

Knee-jerk contradiction

Instead, provide thoughtful insights that improve the conversation.



Your Participation Counts

The conversations we have here set the tone for every new arrival. Help us influence the future of this community by choosing to engage in discussions that make this forum an interesting place to be — and avoiding those that do not.

Discourse provides tools that enable the community to collectively identify the best (and worst) contributions: bookmarks, likes, flags, replies, edits, watching, muting and so forth. Use these tools to improve your own experience, and everyone else’s, too.

Let’s leave our community better than we found it.



If You See a Problem, Flag It

Moderators have special authority; they are responsible for this forum. But so are you. With your help, moderators can be community facilitators, not just janitors or police.

When you see bad behavior, don’t reply. Replying encourages bad behavior by acknowledging it, consumes your energy, and wastes everyone’s time. Just flag it. If enough flags accrue, action will be taken, either automatically or by moderator intervention.

In order to maintain our community, moderators reserve the right to remove any content and any user account for any reason at any time. Moderators do not preview new posts; the moderators and site operators take no responsibility for any content posted by the community.



Always Be Civil

Nothing sabotages a healthy conversation like rudeness:

Be civil. Don’t post anything that a reasonable person would consider offensive, abusive, or hate speech.

Keep it clean. Don’t post anything obscene or sexually explicit.

Respect each other. Don’t harass or grief anyone, impersonate people, or expose their private information.

Respect our forum. Don’t post spam or otherwise vandalize the forum.

These are not concrete terms with precise definitions — avoid even the appearance of any of these things. If you’re unsure, ask yourself how you would feel if your post was featured on the front page of a major news site.

This is a public forum, and search engines index these discussions. Keep the language, links, and images safe for family and friends.



Keep It Tidy

Make the effort to put things in the right place, so that we can spend more time discussing and less cleaning up. So:

Don’t start a topic in the wrong category; please read the category definitions.

Don’t cross-post the same thing in multiple topics.

Don’t post no-content replies.

Don’t divert a topic by changing it midstream.

Don’t sign your posts — every post has your profile information attached to it.

Rather than posting “+1” or “Agreed”, use the Like button. Rather than taking an existing topic in a radically different direction, use Reply as a Linked Topic.



Post Only Your Own Stuff

You may not post anything digital that belongs to someone else without permission. You may not post descriptions of, links to, or methods for stealing someone’s intellectual property (software, video, audio, images), or for breaking any other law.



Powered by You

This site is operated by your friendly moderator team and you, the community. If you have any further questions about how things should work here, open a new topic in  and let’s discuss! If there’s a critical or urgent issue that can’t be handled by a meta topic or flag, contact the moderators.
