replying to: https://x.com/grok/status/1972656305551859790

> On MLQ: Concrete hypo: Family guilts you for skipping holiday dinner (e.g., "You're abandoning us!"). Explain boundary: "I need space." If ignored, simplify: "I'll join virtually." If pushed, reduce to a card; escalate to no invites if needed.

The concrete example in my essay is this:

but first for context, in case you want to search again, here's the essay: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ramirustom2022/Discussion/refs/heads/main/Essay%20Personal%20boundaries.txt

> Now because we’re no longer negotiating, some will say, “You’re being a selfish dictator.” To this we should reply, “Yes I’m a selfish dictator about this and I believe it’s good. If a victim of assault says ‘stop,’ and the abuser screams ‘selfish dictator!’—that’s absurd!!

Note that being selfish is good, because it just means refusing to tolerate abuse.

Note also that society cheats by acting like selfish is bad, as if it means someone is abusing others. 

They are operating on zero-sum logic. Either me or they are getting abused.

I'm operating on non-zero-sum logic. There's a 3rd option, NO ABUSE IN EITHER DIRECTION!

Note that Ayn Rand (and her philosophy Objectivism) explained this. Though I don't think she did it as well as I can do it now. I draw from Eli Goldratt's Theory of Constraints. 

I'll explain the flaw in Ayn Rand's expanation by explaining how it lacks a positive feature in Eli Goldratt's.

I'll quote something I wrote a few years ago: 

> Join me in standing on the shoulders of the giants that created the best ideas about how to live good lives. People like Karl Popper, David Deutsch, Ayn Rand, and Eli Goldratt. 

> 1- Popper for teaching us that all knowledge is created by an evolutionary process of guesses and criticism, and therefore all knowledge is tentative; 

> 2- Deutsch for teaching us that all problems are solvable and that all people are capable of creating the knowledge to solve any problem; 

> 3- Rand for teaching us that there are no inherent conflicts of interest between people, which means the individual does not need to be and should not be sacrificed for the collective; and 

> 4- Goldratt for teaching us that sacrificing the individual for the collective actually means sacrificing the collective, so the idea of sacrificing the individual for the collective is a non-starter.

I found this quote easily because its in one of my spreadsheets for an old organization from years ago (I ended it, but picked up the pieces and restarted again with Uniting The Cults). The quote was labelled as 'Mission' (of the organization).

> Boss hypo: Manipulative boss texts you at 10 PM demanding a report by morning, saying "Team players step up, or you're out." What would you do/say?

"I'm out, and go fuck yourself asshole." or if I want to troll him too:

"Boss act right, stop this nonsense, or you're out [of my life]." Then I'd take a snapshot and make it go viral. Exposing the company's evil to the entire world.

> AMA sounds fun—will think of more Qs!

ok!

> New MLQ: How do you set boundaries with friends who drain your energy without malice?

One time I said to a friend, "If helping you means hurting me, I'm not interested." What he was doing was asking me to do a project with him (a business) but I had problems with it. And I was explaining myself, but he repeatedly ignored what I was saying about why I don't want to do it (as is, without changes to account for my issues with current idea). 

That friend never did shit like that to me again. And it did not ruin the relationship. I think he respected me more when I said that.

Rami
