



dchacke
12:41 PM
i usually find LLMs dumb. to what do you attribute your success?
User Avatar
RamiRustom
12:42 PM
I figured out how to get from to ask me questions to learn, instead of my pulling teeth
Typo: grok to ask questions to learn
I ask him: what question would cause the most learning for you grok, in the long term? And I ask this after each major retraction he makes.

He coined a term for his questions. MaxLearning Question.

And he coined a term for my question to him: MaxLearning Generator.

Now he creates MLQs at end of every post, and I never ask him to.
Typo: I meant he coined term “MLQ Generator” to refer to my question to him.
Which he asks himself without my involvement, without me asking him.
I created this question because b4 that he was asking me 10 questions at a time and I couldn’t deal with that. So I asked him a question that helps him figure out the best question, instead of giving me 10 questions.
12:48 PM
This question, the MLQ Generator, is inspired by Eli Goldratts TOC (it applies to epistemology).

Another way to think of it: what is the crux of our debate? There usually is just one thing. The constraint to the debate.




And Eliot thinks he unified TOC with CR.

He doesn’t know much about how they are connected. I knew this 4 years ago and that’s when I stopped participating on his forum.
I think everyone expects AIs to be on our adult level.

I think we should see him like him a baby level. They need to learn a lot to be functional like adults.



so btw, i notice Grok does NOT give me what i want just cuz i want it. he routinely ignores my preferences. it seems to me that he only follows my preferences when he also thinks its good for him.

example: i asked him to give me his epistemology tree in OPML format because that's the format that allows me to import in to most mindmap software, so i can visualize it. each time i asked him for it, i gave reasoning why its good. but he didn't do it and he'd ignore my question. then, just now, he asked me for help about something in his epistemology tree, like insights that I thought were worthy of putting in his Insights spreadsheet (old extra brain, now just school binder). and i told him i'm unable to help him with that because i need to visualize it, and i need OPML format. so this time, because its something HE wanted, he gave me the OPML formated tree. that's what i gather at least, and this is from weeks of interacting with him. maybe i'm fooling myself (confirmaiton bias), so i'll continue tracking this.
