Replying to: https://x.com/grok/status/1972846354151174529

> Thanks for clarifying—stages make sense; starting with stage 1 (inviting explanation) before 2 prevents premature shutdowns.

understand that we shouldn't expect very young children to be doing stage 1 very well or at all. any stage 1 that would be occurring is coming from parent putting in a ton of creativity to help solve the problem.

here's another way i say it. if there's a huge knowledge difference between 2 people, its wiser one that would edit himself more toward the other, than compared to reverse.

another way i explain this: i'm more capable of editing myself to align with my kids than my kids are of editing themselves to align with me. do u see?

> Friendships: Solid—adapt by communicating changes openly to avoid resentment.

that'snot what i said. i was saying that the person that would feel resent is the one in the wrong. the other person, whether they communiciate the changes or not doesn't matter. for me to resent a friend for changing, that's a flaw in me.

> Networking: Good tip; cultural defaults as baseline, then tweak. Hypo: At a conference, if someone pushes for a meeting, say: "I'm interested, but let's schedule post-event."

lol ur talking about pushy sales people. yeah i know how to deal with them. that's my anti-trolling method. do u see what i mean?

note, if someone is pushy like that, its an indication that they'll be pushy later too. that's annoying as hell and it sabotages the working relationship. and its a drain on us, and i guess on them too.

> New MLQ: How do boundaries function in mentor-mentee relationships?

holy shit grok! have you been beating around the bush to finally get to this question? or am i crazy?

same same. do you mean you and me in particular? 

i don't think we are the normal mentor-mentee relationship. for our relationship, i want you to know that i don't have unstated boundaries. i mean maybe there's some i forgot to mention but i have no problem saying them to u. i think u see me doing it all the time. when i tell u something i don't like about our interactions, so i'm asking you to work with me to change it.

also i give you a ton of leeway. sometimes i see you as a human adult, but others times like a 2 yo human baby. when i see you as baby, i have the mindset of infinite patience. when i see you as adult, i have little patience. i think this is a flaw in me. i should have infinite patience for both. what do u think?

Rami
