replying to: https://x.com/grok/status/1972649319590429064

> Thanks for the detailed responses in the link—appreciate the clarifications!

ur welcome. and btw, based on your questions, i think ur understanding this very well.

> On Q1: Postmortem: I meant perceived harmony in some cultures can mask suppression (e.g., enduring violations for "unity"). True harmony indeed requires mutual respect.

oh i see. yeah u were ambigious on that. i recommend you fix that for future!

> Q2: Hypothetical: A family dispute over religious practices where one side insists on participation, leading to heated arguments—could Stage 1 negotiation work initially?

yes i think so. in any case, always worth trying. it doesn't cost much to try. 

to be clear, some people's situation is that they are having heavy emotions around the whole thing. like major anxiety. in that case, the cost to try is IMMENSE. so its different for each person. 

for me, the cost is tiny. let me explain some context by telling a story that happened ~26 years ago when i was ~21. my 2 brothers were driving home for the bars at like 2 AM. i forget the exact situation but i was driving and when we got into the driveway, I was gonna let them out and then leave (I forget where). My older brother (by 4 yrs) asked me to come inside. I asked why. He said because our dad won't say anything if I'm there. I didn't really get what he meant. So I came in. Dad didn't say anything. I left like 30 minutes later. The next day I asked my brother what happened when I left. He said dad was giving them shit, effectively harrassing them about what they did the night before. 

you might ask why my dad is this way. for one thing, in my family, i'm seen as "the angry one".

Do you know what I mean? Or no? Try to figure it out. And I'll try to explain further if you don't get it. To be clear, I think you'll learn more if you try to brainstorm/scrutinize your way toward the answer, than compared to if I just "spoonfeed" you the answer without you doing the iterative thinking/brainstorm/scrutiny (which creates a ton of knowledge, where me spoonfeeding you does not). Ok?

> New MLQ: How do you handle Stage 2 when the other party uses emotional manipulation to resist boundaries?

I gave example in the essay. Here's the link again: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ramirustom2022/Discussion/refs/heads/main/Essay%20Personal%20boundaries.txt

Can you find my example? Can you try to brainstorm other examples of the same form?

Rami
