Last modified: 05/02/2021

Intro 
the makers of this movie decided to teach us a little bit about human nature. About anger. What it is. What it’s for. What to do with it. How it connects to bigger things, like father/son relationship, hero/villain relationship, and also romance relationship (the feminine role and the masculine role).

Audio recording
This is a link where you can download the video file. It has my voice plus my computer screen. https://mega.nz/folder/xJJ0yZLC#-KAYcFBAPpn6GjxoQCaTzA

Highlights
1- Why was Bruce good (tried to never hurt people, only protect) and his dad was not so much (tried to hurt people)?
  a- Bruce was loved (by his mom and by his gf)
  b- dad lost his love (i think he blamed the world for that, instead of himself)
  c- So like Bruce never wanted to hurt anybody. The dad wanted revenge. 
2- People can learn to control their anger - they are not damned
  a- To control it so that you use it for good and never for evil
3- Bad ppl hate strength. They are threatened by it. That’s why Betty’s dad hated Bruce. He wants to be the strongest. He doesn’t want there to exist someone stronger than him. (Good ppl love it when there are stronger ppl. It means there’s less pressure on them to save the world.)

First scene
Bruce is a teenager and has nightmares. He doesn’t remember what they’re about when he wakes up.

We find out that Bruce just got dumped by Betty. Bruce (hulk) has a ex-gf. they are friends. and co-workers. she teases him for being emotionally-distant. well, she made a joke that she falls for emotionally-distant men

she makes a joke again about his being emotionally-distant (after a series of jokes between the both of them), and then he said "oh and now we come full circle back to that, nice work Betty" (with sarcastic tone, but same joking tone as the whole series of back and forth jokes). but then you see her look down. she looks sad.

she seems to want to talk to him about his emotions and he doesn't want to and he's being mean about it.

now there's a scene where it looks like the past because Bruce and Betty are lying next to eachother and talking about stuff.

Betty is recounting a dream. a recurring dream.

it's partly true and partly fake. the true part is that she was 2 yo and abandoned by her father (he was miliary). the fake part is that at the end of the dream, adult Bruce is choking and hurting her (2 yo Betty).

and Bruce says "that's terrible. you know I would never hurt you" and Betty takes a deep breath and sighs. puts her hand on his chest. so as to say "i know".

Bruce’s nightmares
Bruce is having a nightmare. it was angry stuff, he's very angry in it. it was when he was a child seeing his parents fight. his dad was hurting his mom.

Bruce risks his life to save someone
During their work there was an accident and Bruce did something to save someone. he should have gotten hurt but he apparently didn't.

So after the accidnet Bruce and Betty had a talk about it. Bruce was fine. Betty was sad, tears coming down her face. Bruce said something, with a bit of a giggle, and Betty took it as joking, but he was being serious.

Betty replied, "Bruce, this isn't funny. I was watching you. You were going to die. And I was going to have to watch you die." (she looked mad, sad of course, but mad too)

Bruce immediately says "Betty, I'm sorry" (as he comes in close to her)

Bruce trying to deescalate, but dad won’t leave him alone (we already knew from earlier that Bruce is adopted. and that he doesn't know his birth parents.) he's in the hospital bed, still from the accident. his birth dad comes in. tells Bruce the news that he's his son. they talk a bit. Bruce doesn't believe it. asks him to leave. he doesn't and says more things. Bruce tells him to leave. he doesn't and says more things. Bruce is getting angry now. and yells for him to leave. The dad backs off a little. and leaves. as he's leaving he says he'll be back. The dad wants Bruce to get angry. it's like he likes it. he enjoys the anger. Bruce does not enjoy it. he doesn't want to be angry.

first time Bruce is triggered and turns to Hulk first time Bruce turned into the Hulk he destroyed the whole room.
but then he's a bit calm (but still the Hulk) his birth dad is there. then Bruce has a memory. PTSD. he remembers his dad beating his mom. he remembers being angry. and he goes ballistic (he didn't want to hurt his birth dad), jumping out of the house (through the wall). it was one jumping motion, and he lands on the roof. and he screams in anger "RRRROOOOOAAARR", and then he runs away.

new scene
Betty is asking Bruce about what happened to him last night. she didn't know. he wasn't sure either. (he was blackout angry) but he had a good feeling about it. he said it was like being reborn. she looked like she didn't understand any of it.

same scene
oh no. Betty's dad walked in with a bunch of men. they are the military. and they came to take Bruce away. Betty and Bruce don't know it. and Betty doesn't seem scared. she doesn't know what it's like when men want to be aggressive to another man (start a fight).

(i don't like it when someone tries to start a fight with me. i always try to deescalate. but if someone didn't let me deescalate, then i will make sure i win. i will deliver max force to end him, short of breaking my bones to do it. and if i fuck up a bit and over do it, whatever (i'll accept some broken bones in my fist if it means ending him). to be clear, i've never had to be in a fight before. i've always successfully deescalated. so it's not accurate to call me a fighter since i've never fought. but the "fights" i did in football is enough proof for me that i can do it in real life. also i've practiced punching and kicking in tikwando and they were very powerful. i don't think i would do well landing them on someone's head and body, but if any of them connected, that person is going down hard. unless it's a real figher i'm up against, like a navy seal. which is why people should never get into fights becuase you never know who you are gonna be fighting. and to be clear, navy seals do not start fights. they end them.)

new scene
Bruce gets a visit from another shitty man. The man attacks Bruce. Bruce tries to stop him (without attacking him) - an attempt at deescalation. But he kept attacking.

Finally Bruce becomes Hulk.
And the man is scared now. Just the look on Hulks face, and his whole body posture, is scary to the man.

(I've had this before. sometimes a man will try to start a fight but then when they see my anger, they back down. they realize that their anger is small, fake, and stupid. mine is about life or death shit. i don't get angry unless it's fucking important. and then when i do, it's all out war. of course it's shouting war first, to get them to back down. i don't want war. so i threaten the worst fucking war so they will stop.)

same scene
while Bruce is still Hulk, and like he was still just showing the anger to that man who attacked him, some other guys (with the attacking man) started attacking him too. and so he gets even angrier (Hulk grows even bigger the more angry he gets).

the scene ends and Hulk barely hurt anyone. he did hit the attacking man once or twice but they were small hits for what he's capable of doing. he didn't want to hurt them. he only wanted them to stop. and then he ran away.

he's afraid to use his strength. on people at least. he's totally fine with crushing cars and stuff lol

first time Betty sees Bruce as Hulk for the first time Betty sees Bruce as Hulk. it's because Bruce found out that his dad sent some attackers to hurt Betty (in order to hurt Bruce). Bruce (as Hulk) went to save her. He got there just in time as the attackers came. Bruce puts her in the car to protect her. She looks so scared. He does not look scared. He's prepared for war.

there's 3 attackers and only one Bruce. But Bruce is stronger than them. he got in between the car and the attackers. and the fight started. at one point 1 of the attackers got past Bruce and to the car. Betty is so scared.

Bruce rushes to save her and slaps the attacker away like a toy. But the other 2 attackers get him from behind and take him down. Now all 3 of them are on him. He seems to be losing.

She's so scared. she doesn't know what to do. Bruce manages to knock away 2 of them and manages to get back on his feet. Soon after his was able to focus his force on just 1 of them, and with one blow crushed him (to death). At the same time one of the attackers got to the car again, where Betty was inside. she was so scared. he was breaking the window to get in.

And then Bruce saw the attacker and rushed to him and delivered a crushing blow, so hard that the attacker immediately died and smashed through the window almost into Betty's lap. it was so scary for her.

For a moment Betty was looking at Bruce. she was scared. not sure if she was scared of him or not.

Then the 3rd attacker came on him again. He was not paying attention because he was focused on her. That led to the attacker getting a very powerful blow against Bruce. It scared Betty so much because she thought he's going to lose.

And then Bruce delivered one final blow on him, and he exploded right in front of her. Blood everywhere.

Bruce was so hurt (physically). He started to hobble away. He didn't want her to see him like that anymore. As he was walkign away he fell to his knees. he saw his reflection in the water. he calmed down. Betty had not gotten out of the car yet. She was looking at Bruce from far away. She still seemed scared. maybe worried for him.

Now Bruce was calm (no longer Hulk). He hobbled towards the car. he opened the door. and feel into her arms. head in her chest. Bruce said, "he sent his attackers didn't he... but i killed them!" (and he got angry again for a moment, clenching his fists).

oh no.. he put his hands on her as if to choke her as if he didn't recognize her.

wow. Betty is asking Bruce what he felt. he said, "rage, power, and freedom"

a bit further into the same discussion and Bruce says that when the feeling comes over him (becoming the Hulk), he likes it.


Betty and her dad are discussing Bruce’s anger and whether or not he’s damned. Betty says ‘not damned’. Dad says ‘damned’. Her dad believes that the son is bad like his dad. (like it’s a genetic thing)


Betty finds Bruce
Hulk was being attacked by the military. Constant war kept Hulk angry and he kept getting angrier. Finally the war ends because the military realizes they can’t win like this. Betty convinced her dad (head of military) to try her way. She locks eyes with him. And he instantly calms down. He doesn’t think about anything else except for her. The war is over. Bruce says, “you found me” Betty smiles and says, “you weren’t that hard to find.” Bruce disagrees, “yes i was”. Betty knew what he meant and she got sad for him. He was talking about the real him, the non-angry Bruce.

Skipping ahead to the big fight with his dad:
Bruce did not want to fight his dad. But his dad wanted to fight. He wouldn’t leave Bruce alone. He kept attacking him. So finally Hulk decided to give in. He had enough. So he unleashed his anger, directing it all to his dad. And very quickly his dad realized that his plan didn't work. He couldn't take all the anger. He didn't know how much anger there was. He died instantly. Kinda like a heart attack. It was too much for him.

After the fight was over and bruce had calmed down, he has a fond memory of his dad being nice to him as a child (a loving parent). He was putting bruce to bed and he said “sweet dreams”. But Hulk was ok. He was strong enough mentally to withstand the battle. He was ok in the sense that he was alive and strong and still able to carry the world on his shoulders. But broken in the sense that he had so many traumas that he had not understood yet. 

One thing Hulk knew was that he wanted to get rid of his anger. And he thought he could do it. And he set out to try. But he has since given up that goal. Now he accepts it. And now he puts all his efforts into controlling it, so that he only ever uses it for good and never for evil.

“You’re making me angry.”
“You wouldn't like me when I’m angry.”

Rami
