Replying to these:
https://x.com/leoalexart/status/1972987381059035473
https://x.com/leoalexart/status/1972987678137426051

> I agree, but I'm no TCS expert. 😅I think there is a problem that parents have a responsibility towards children that nobody has to anyone else. What might feel as invasion of personal boundary is just parental duty. 1/2

ur right, my essay doesn't explain this. i'm gonna add it. thank you.

> Say parent wants to play games alone on the PC but child wants to play with parent. The parent should play with the child. If it's an adult friend who wants to play with you, you can say no. 2/2

to be clear, child asking parent to play with them is not invastion of personal boundary. so i'm not sure what concrete example you meant by the abstract 'invasion of personal boundary'. can do a concrete example of what u mean?

in any case, i think its more complicated than what u describe. 

1- you didn't specify sophisication of child. imagine a 30 yo child. i guess you mean young child, but i think the age doesn't matter. its the wisdom of the child that matters.

2- imagine the child is wise/sophisticated enough, and asks parent to play. following your method (if i understand it correctly), then parent would play, regardless of their prefs, and regardless of the current wisdom/sophistication of child. like imagine my 20 yo daughters ask me to play a game with them, one that i'm ok with playing sometimes, but i don't want to play now because i'm playing some other single-person game. i don't think we should follow a mechanical rule like "always do what child says if they ask for game play and u wanna play another game without them". i think its dangerous to always do this because it ignores the parent's prefs.

3- i think what needs to happen is creativity on the part of both parent and child to create mutual understanding and agreement on what to do. and the more wise the child is, the more the child can help in this, shouldering more of responsibility to create new ideas designed to resolve the conflict.

thoughts?

Rami
