replying to: https://x.com/TCSparents/status/1973501221857321047

> This is not consistent with Taking Children Seriously. It looks to me to be trying to nail down your preferred standards (make them immune from criticism) by getting the others to ‘agree’ to these fixed standards instead of everything flowing. Otherwise why call it “boundaries” and why use the word “habit”? So much of life and problem-solving happens inexplicitly, that when you try to make everything explict like this, it cuts off valuable inexplicit and unconscious problem-solving and knowledge, and it has the effect of deterring others from expressing their disagreement later. 

on fixed standards: I didn't advocate fixed standards. If that was unclear, I have some new language to go in the essay that addresses a question someone asked me: "When do you override a boundary, and why?" So here's whats being added to the essay (if its' not already clear in the essay): all ideas are approximations. so boundaries too. there's always exceptions to the rule. there will be contexts that weren't anticipated. this is the nature of being fallible.

on try to make everything explicit: I do not advocate that. I think I got this criticism previously and I realized my essay was not very clear. So I have a new first sentence for the whole essay to address it:

> For some people, day-to-day interactions work smoothly without ever talking about boundaries, because shared intuition and cultural norms are enough. For others, especially in unhealthy families, most interactions are difficult, and intuition fails them. This essay is about those harder cases...

on inexplicit/unconscious: feelings/intuitions/emotions are part of the process. if that wasn't clear in the essay, i have to fix it. note, even the hard scientists recognize that intuition is part of the process of science.

> It is no good just using the words contending that there is creativity and openness to criticism in your process when everything else you are saying (about boundaries) belies that. 
> Any time one is feeling as if something needs to be nailed down, that is a clue that there is some staticity there that will be interfering with the creative problem-solving of the system.

i don't know what ur saying here. clarify? or is this resolved from the above?

> Leo makes a good point about parents’ obligations to their children. The child you have chosen to raise is not like an adult friend, say. You have created obligations to your child that you have not created to your adult friend. 

Leo, as far as I know, advocated no need for creativity. Just do it. And I replied to that with a real life scenario. 

> if child has full diaper, and parent gags from the smell and doens't want to do it (wants to wait for coparent to come home and do it), and if they follow ur method (no creativity), they'd do it without making adjustments like "put nose clamp on to prevent smelling it".

the creativity method says do it but do it in a way that you're ok with it, like putting nose clamp.

> So when your pre-verbal child behaves like a pre-verbal child might often behave, such as throwing a toy, that should not be seeming problematic to you (unless the child is upset, in which case you would be trying to solve the problem that created the upset, not the toy-throwing). If a parent finds a small child throwing a toy problematic, I dread to think how they are going to navigate actual problems.

i'm not sure what ur referring to but i let grok and chatgpt add examples and i might have missed a stupid example they added. 

Rami
